[THEME MUSIC]
>>LISA GARR: Hi, I'm Lisa Garr,
host of "Gaia Inspirations,"
and our topic for the series
that we're taping here
at the Celebrate
Your Life Conference
is to explore the
meaning of I am.
And joining me to talk
about this and so much more
is a man who's been a
huge influence in my life
and my healing process,
Dr. Joe Dispenza.
Dr. Joe is an expert in
the role of the function
of the human brain
and how it creates
a bridge between
true human potential,
and also the latest in
the scientific theories
of neuroplasticity.
Welcome.
Thank you so much
for being here.
>>JOE DISPENZA: Hi, Lisa.
I'm happy to be with you.
>>LISA: I'm always
excited that you're here.
So this meaning, this
"I am" has kind of
taken on a wonderful meaning
here throughout the series.
What is your experience
of the "I am"?
Do you have a specific
experience of that?
>>DISPENZA: Are
you talking about
the "I am" in terms
of the universal "I
am" or the "I am" in terms
of you and I as an "I am",
or both?
>>LISA: Yeah, whatever
it means to you.
>>DISPENZA: Well, I
think that thoughts
are the language of
the brain and feelings
are the language of the body.
And how you think and how you
feel creates a state of being.
So if you're thinking
insecure thoughts,
you're going to turn on a
set of circuits in your brain
that produces a level of mind,
and another part of the brain
is going to make a chemical for
you to begin to feel insecure.
The moment you feel
insecure, your brain
is monitoring its
internal state,
you are going to think
more corresponding thoughts
equal to how you feel, which
is going to generate more
chemicals to feel
insecure, and then thinking
more insecure thoughts.
And that cycle of thinking
and feeling and feeling
and thinking, creating
that state of being,
causes the person to
say, I am insecure.
And whenever you
say I am anything,
you are commanding the
present moment into a destiny.
So then the antithesis
is also true.
If you're grateful and
you're loving life,
you are going to think
corresponding thoughts
equal to that
emotional state, which
is going to make a
different factory
or blend of chemicals for you
to feel more gracious and more
kind, more giving,
which is going
to generate more thoughts.
And you're going to create
a different state of being.
So the trouble I
think we have is
that the process of thinking
and feeling and feeling
and thinking over time
conditions the body
to subconsciously
become the mind.
Now once the body
becomes the mind,
the servant is now the master.
And so the program begins
to become activated,
and now people slip
into unconscious states.
So in order for us to
change, then-- and this
is the problem that I
have with affirmations.
When you're having
an affirmation,
an affirmation is,
you're affirming
your I am, your state of being.
So if you're saying,
I am abundant,
but you're feeling
lack, I am successful,
unworthy, that's
mind and body in opposition.
So then, when a
person then knows
how to regulate and change
their internal states
and they move into a
new state of being.
When they're in
that state of being,
the side effect of being
in that state of being is,
I am wealthy.
You're actually affirming
what you already are.
>>LISA: So it's not the words.
It's the state of being.
>>DISPENZA: Exactly.
>>LISA: So the words I
am won't change anything,
if you say I am abundant.
But if you feel into that and
experience that viscerally,
that changes the chemistry
from the brain to the body.
>>DISPENZA: Yeah.
Let's say it another way.
You will only accept, believe,
and surrender to the thoughts
equal to your emotional state.
And you will not accept
belief and surrender
to any thoughts that are not
equal to your emotional state.
So as an example, a person
goes to a doctor's office.
The doctor says,
OK, you're diagnosed
with MS or lupus or cancer.
The moment the person
gets the diagnosis,
they're either going to
feel sadness or fear.
Now the moment they
start feeling fear,
they are going to think
corresponding thoughts
equal to that emotional state.
So now those thoughts will
slip by their analytical mind,
program their autonomic
nervous system
to make more chemicals
equal to that state.
So then they can think
positively all they want.
They could say, I'm going
to heal this condition.
But if they're feeling fear--
>>LISA: And cortisol's
still releasing.
>>DISPENZA: The chemistry
with the brain and body
are at odds, right?
So then if you get
a person, then,
to change their emotional
state and open their heart,
and then begin to feel empowered
or invincible or unlimited,
then they will begin to
accept, believe, and surrender
to the thoughts equal
to that emotional state,
and they'll program their
automatic nervous system
to make a new
pharmacy of chemicals
to match that state of being.
So this is why
affirmations don't work,
because they never get
past the analytical mind.
You know, the person will
say, I am wealthy, I am love,
I am happy.
But they haven't addressed
the part of them that's
not in alignment with that.
>>LISA: So you could say,
I am wealthy, but stare
at the bank account that
has a bunch of zeros on it.
>>DISPENZA: Right.
>>LISA: So that is a break
in your truth with yourself,
your authenticity with yourself.
It's not true.
>>DISPENZA: Now the I
am that lives within us,
that invisible intelligence
that's giving life,
has a presence.
It's an awareness.
It's a consciousness.
And that consciousness, as an
awareness, is paying attention.
That's the definition
of awareness.
So it is observing
our states of being,
and it's always
endorsing who we are.
So if you're really
happy being unhappy
and you are a victim to your
life, it honors free will
and it will endorse the
very chemicals, and actually
the very reality, you experience
equal to that state of being.
So when you come out of
your resting state-- and it
requires coming out
of your resting state.
In other words, this
observer is omnipotent.
It's omnipresent.
It doesn't move.
It's just constant.
It's a loving intelligence
and it's intelligent love.
Our attention is all
over the place, you know,
and it's saying, tell
me what you want.
Just give me a minute,
just line up with me here.
But when you get present
with it and you turn inward,
and when your will
matches its will,
and when your mind
matches its mind,
and when your love for life
matches its love for life
and you're present
with it, and now you
are turning inward to it, and
you're not saying, I want,
I need, I hope, I wish,
that's based in polarity.
You're saying I am.
I am unlimited, I am
empowered, I am invincible.
And when you really feel it
and there is that alignment
and it says, OK, I
am going, the I am
is going to endorse
your I am because you
are an extension of my mind.
And I'll begin to change
the very neurocircuitry,
the neurochemistry,
the very kinetics,
and even the expression of
your life equal to that.
>>LISA: So when you say, I
am deserving of that raise.
I am capable of
that new job, that
starts to align yourself
with the finances
that you are wanting.
>>DISPENZA: As long as your mind
and body are working together.
That's the definition
of the I am.
So just like you know when
someone is present with you
because they're
paying attention,
this intelligence requires
the same degree of attention.
>>LISA: I get it.
So how, then, does the
placebo work, then?
Your book, "You
Are the Placebo."
>>DISPENZA: Well, in every
single case of the placebo,
the placebo's based
on three things.
Number one is conditioning.
You give someone a
pill, and it's blue,
and blue pills work
better than red pills,
and it has a certain drug in it.
And you take that drug and it
changes some internal state,
it reduces pain or it
takes away a symptom.
And then you take it again,
and then you take it again,
and you take it again.
And sooner or later, you can
actually replace that blue pill
with just a blue pill with sugar
in it, and the person takes it,
and by conditioning,
association,
they begin to make the very
chemicals based on the past, so
stimulus response.
So we could say,
then, conditioning
is based on the past.
Now expectation is the second
element of the placebo, which
means expectation, then, is
when you're told something
and you begin to
expect an outcome.
And your selecting that pill
represents a new potential
in the quantum field.
And a certain percentage
of those people
accept, believe, and
surrender to the idea
and begin to emotionally
embrace the outcome.
And if you combine
that clear intention
with an elevated
emotion, you're moving
into a new state of being.
So now as an
example, as you begin
to anticipate that
occurring, your body
is actually living in
that future reality
in the present
moment, and your body
begins to make the very
chemicals to endorse
that state of being.
Now who's doing the
fabrication of the chemicals?
The I am within us,
because it's always
endorsing who we're being.
So if conditioning
is based on the past,
then expectation is
based on the future.
The third thing is
assigning meaning to things.
If a doctor says, oh,
this pill will actually
increase serotonin receptors,
and you have the pictures,
and people look at it and
they start to think about it.
And when they take the pill,
they assign meaning to it.
And turns out you can
give someone a sugar pill,
and they could be told that
it's an antidepressant.
And 81% of those people who will
get better by thought alone.
It wasn't the pill
that did the healing.
Actually they were making
their own antidepressants
in that second.
>>LISA: So you
can literally take
a bottle of antidepressants,
put half sugar pills
in there and half
the actual drug,
take them, and not
experience the withdrawals
that the doctors say
you will experience
if you don't take it.
>>DISPENZA: Exactly.
Well, let's just
say it another way.
Four out of five people
who are taking a pill that
has nothing in it
that are told they're
taking an antidepressant,
four out of those five people
will respond as well as people
who are taking antidepressants.
And many of those
people will actually
have functional
brain scans to show
that their brain has improved.
In other words, it's
not just in their mind.
It's in their brain.
And they're making their
own antidepressants.
So how does that work in
terms of the state of being?
Well, you combine that clear
intention-- getting clear
that I could get
well from this--
you start feeling an elevated
emotion like inspiration or joy
or gratitude.
You just moved from
living in your past
to living in a new future.
And when you move into
that state of being,
that intelligence that's
giving you life, the I am,
is going to organize
your chemistry
to reflect who you're being.
>>LISA: Let's take a look
here at Dr. Joe talking
about "You Are the Placebo."
Take a look.
>>DISPENZA: My name
is Dr. Joe Dispenza.
I'd like to take a moment to
introduce you to my new book,
"You Are the Placebo--
Making Your Mind Matter."
I loved writing
this book because it
was an opportunity for me
to help people understand
that they have within
their reach all
the biological and
neurological machinery
to produce greater levels
of health in their body
and produce some pretty
astounding changes
in their life.
The book is about you.
It's about an
opportunity for you
to understand the importance of
changing your health by thought
alone.
That's what the
placebo is about.
Why is that you can
give a person a sugar
pill, a saline injection,
or perform a fake surgery
and a certain percentage
of those people
actually have a greater
effects in healing
than the people who
actually got the real drug,
got the real surgery?
There must be some
element of mind involved.
And that's why I wrote the book.
I take people on a
journey in this book,
with some really
interesting stories
of how people were healed by
thought alone, how they were
believing that they were
taking a real medication,
and in fact they were
taking a placebo.
And the brain
changed to a degree
that it looked like they had
been taking the real drug.
In other words, when that
person accepted, believed,
and surrendered to the
condition without any analysis,
they began to program
their subconscious
mind, or their autonomic
nervous system.
And their body, through its
own pharmacy of chemicals,
produced the same response
as if they had taken the drug
or had the surgery or
received some type of therapy.
The question is,
can you teach people
how to utilize the
placebo response?
And instead of putting
their belief in something
that's inert and known
to them, can they
begin to select a
new possible reality
and emotionally embrace
it to such a degree
that they begin to
condition their body
into a new state of being, and
their autonomic nervous system
begins to make their
own blend of chemicals
that causes the body
to literally respond
to a new mind.
Well, the answer is yes.
Over the last 25
years we've been
teaching people around the
world that they are the placebo.
We have demystified
some of the principles
so that they understand how
to apply it in certain ways
so they can begin to
experience the benefits.
We'll show you and
introduce you to people
in the book in our
workshops-- some of them
that had rare genetic
disorders that science
had no solution for-- and
they healed themselves
by thought alone.
We have scientific
evidence in the book,
brain scans to show that those
people that actually made
the significant
changes, that there
were permanent changes that took
place in their brain as well.
We'll also end the book with
a nice exercise or meditation
so you can begin
to understand how
to apply the principles
so that you can
begin to be your own placebo.
I hope you enjoy it.
>>LISA: That is quite
astounding to see
that people have actually
healed themselves
from irreversible illnesses.
And you've seen this again
and again in your conferences
in front of you.
People all the time
are reversing disease.
But I want to go back to the
anti-depressant question.
So if you have--
the doctors say,
if go off your
antidepressants you're
going to have a
withdrawal period.
How do you avoid that if you
are only taking a placebo?
>>DISPENZA: Well, if
you're taking a placebo,
there are certain
percentage of people that
will experience the nocebo.
They'll experience the side
effects of the very medication
they think they're taking
because some people are
optimists, some
people are pessimists.
And so a certain
percentage of people
will experience the side effects
of dizziness and nausea and--
>>LISA: Even if they're
taking a placebo.
>>DISPENZA: Even though
they're taking a placebo.
>>LISA: That's how
powerful the mind is.
>>DISPENZA: Yeah.
So there are some very
strong chemical correlations
between withdrawals
of certain medications
that have a little bit more
of an addictive tendency.
But--
>>LISA: Are there
studies around this?
>>DISPENZA: Yeah.
I mean, there's
quite a few studies.
But the key is that when
a person is experiencing,
say, anxiety, and
they're taking something
to reduce their anxiety, or they
have depression and are taking
something to stimulate
their depression,
they're believing that
something outside of them
is going to change
their internal state.
In many cases, it does.
So then when they're
no longer taking it,
they're also experiencing
the withdrawal
of the anticipation of taking
the very thing that they think
that's helping them as well.
So there's a margin of grayness
that isn't so black and white.
And we know this to be the
case because, as an example,
you can tell a
person who is going
for their first
chemotherapy treatment,
you can tell them that
chemotherapy is going to make
them nauseous and vomit.
In 40% to 50% of those
people, on their drive
over to their first
chemotherapy treatment,
will experience nausea
before the treatment.
So I always say, if
50% of those people
can get nauseous on their drive
to their first chemotherapy
treatment, 50% of the
people in the world
can get well on
their drive to work
in anticipation of something
wonderful happening.
It's the same exact phenomena.
>>LISA: The same
relationship between what
the brain tells the body and
the body tells the brain.
>>DISPENZA: Exactly.
>>LISA: Exact same thing.
So there's this great video that
you have on your website, which
really made such an
impact in my life
to be able to see these
neurons wiring together
and firing together.
This is something that I've
heard you say so many times.
But to physically
see it is impressive.
And I don't know how you
get a camera in the brain
to be able to look at
something like this.
This video shows how we
truly-- when we change a habit
and we break the habit
of being ourselves
and create a new way
of doing something,
that the neurons literally fire
together and wire together.
How many times do you have
to do this in order for this
to happen?
For it to actually
create a bundle?
>>DISPENZA: You
like this question.
>>LISA: I do.
>>DISPENZA: Well, first of
all we're looking at something
called plasticity.
So many people
think the brain is
fixed, like neurons
are like leafless oak
trees in the winter
and they're static.
Nothing could be
further from the truth.
Your brain, first of
all, is the consistency
of a soft boiled egg.
It's 78% water.
It's like soft butter.
And it's so much water,
and the water actually
facilitates electrical charges.
So then as you interact
with your environment,
when you think differently, when
you make a different choice,
when you behave differently,
when you have a new experience,
when you feel differently,
they have biological effects
that causes those neurons to
literally repattern themselves.
So you learn something new.
Nobel Prize Laureate
Kandel, in the year 2000,
found that when people learn
one bit of information,
they double the number of
connections in their brain
from 1,300 connections
to 2,600 connections.
But here's the key.
If they didn't review
that information,
if they didn't revisit it,
if they didn't rehearse it
in their mind, those
circuits were pruned apart
within hours or days.
So if learning is making
new synaptic connections,
then remembering is
maintaining and sustaining
those connections.
So what's the
ingredient that causes
those neurons to stick more?
Attention is one of them.
>>LISA: Repetition.
>>DISPENZA: Repetition
is the other.
And so when a person begins to
repeat something like a phone
number, or a line in
a song, or they're
meeting someone
for the first time
and they have to pay
attention to their name,
if they're not present
and they're not
paying attention, of
course those circuits
never actually glue together.
But if the person produces
an emotional response where
you shake their hand and they
give you a hug and a kiss
and they say, I know
your mother because I
went to school with her.
>>LISA: Oh, yes.
>>DISPENZA: In the moment,
you just see this person,
and you feel differently
inside of you.
The moment you feel
differently inside of you,
you're going to pay
attention more to whatever's
causing it outside of you.
And that event in and of
itself is called a memory.
So the more highly
charged emotional
experiences we have that take
us out of our resting state
causes us to pay attention more
to our external environment.
I mean, think of 9/11.
Every single American
in the United States
can tell you exactly where
they were, who they were with,
and what they were doing that
time of day if they were awake.
And we could say that
everything that they
were seeing and hearing
changed their internal state.
The moment they felt
differently, they woke up
and they looked to
see what caused it,
and it was that event.
So then they look
around them and they
correlate their changes with
everything in that moment.
So then the key,
then, it is if we
are going to truly make
longstanding connections
in our brain, the more
passionate we are,
the more we can feel deeply, the
more that we can assign meaning
to what we're doing in the
midst of that elevated emotion,
it's going to cause us to
come out of our resting state.
And the internal
experience that we're
having becomes a
long-term memory.
And now the deal is sealed.
>>LISA: Well, that's-- for 9/11
or really traumatic stressful
events, yes, you've explained to
me that it digs a deeper groove
in the brain and those chemicals
cause those memories to last
longer.
But yet the birthdays
and the celebrations
and those things, we
tend to forget them.
It's not the same chemistry.
What's up with that?
>>DISPENZA: Wow, this
is a great conversation,
because we were laughing
about this the other day.
You know, you can
have 10 great things
happen to you in one day.
You can have one
bad thing happen.
>>LISA: What is up with that?
>>DISPENZA: And you will always
remember the one bad thing,
and you'll forget
the good things.
And the reason being is because
we're programmed for survival.
In survival, the
one bad thing that
happens you've got
to pay attention
to because you're going to
Have to anticipate, if
it happens again, how
you're going to deal with it.
So we put a lot of our attention
on those survival things,
and we're wired for survival.
So then in order to truly
make substantial changes, not
by forcing an outcome or
controlling an outcome,
overly analyzing an
outcome, but to really
change in the new
model of science
with a clear intention
and elevated emotion,
I think we have to lay
down the very thing we used
our whole life to get
what we want for something
greater to occur.
And that's really
easy to talk about,
and it's a little
more difficult to do.
>>LISA: I mean,
I'm thinking, when
are we going to be over
this survival thing?
But you said you have a
different relationship
with death.
I as well, because I went
through that transition
experience, that
near death, they
call it, experience
to understand
what that may be like,
that potential for me,
is that that experience of
the other side is oneness,
is peace, is
simplicity, is beauty.
I have that relationship
because of my experience.
You have that relationship
because of your experience.
I see you in the hallways.
You don't listen
to people complain.
You say, if you don't love
it you're not going to do it.
If you love your life too much
to do things that you don't
want to do-- I hear it all.
I record it all, Joe.
>>DISPENZA: Well, I mean,
this is a healthy conversation
because--
>>LISA: You changed
your perspective.
>>DISPENZA: I have to.
And I think that the
ultimate truth is oneness,
that everything else is
a diminishing of that.
So if you understand
biologically
where oneness occurs, it occurs
right here in the heart center.
And what if you took 10
minutes out of your day,
15 minutes out of your
day, to rest your attention
in that center-- where
you place your attention
is where you place your
energy-- to cultivate
an elevated emotion
like gratitude or joy
or the joy for existence or
the love of life or compassion,
and you felt it deeply.
Do you know that the moment
energy moves into your heart,
the field around your body
expands to nine meters wide?
When you're living in
survival and you're
living in fear and anxiety
and anger and hostility
and violence and
sadness and guilt,
you're drawing from
this invisible field
and you're turning
it into chemistry.
And the field around
your body shrinks.
Now you're more matter
and less energy.
You're particle and less weight,
and you don't have any energy
to actually form long-term
building projects like growth
and repair, or to create
anything you want in your life.
Turns out the heart
has a magnetic field.
So it's like dropping
a pebble in the water.
And if you can sustain
that emotional state,
now you are dropping
pebble after pebble
and it's sending ripples out.
The more profound you feel, the
more passionate, more enriched
you feel, the bigger the stone
you're dropping in the water,
the bigger the wave.
Now all frequency, all
energy carries information.
So that's the magnetic charge.
So what is the information?
It's the intention?
It's the mind now.
So then you send an
intention on that wave.
You have a clear intention,
and that information
is being carried on
that frequency wave.
Now you're broadcasting an
electromagnetic signature
into the field.
And so then when you're
living in survival,
you're always trying to control
the outcome, force the outcome,
predict the outcome.
And when you do that,
you're in your own way,
because you're matter
trying to influence matter.
And it's going to take a
certain amount of time.
We call that
three-dimensional creation.
Fifth-dimensional
creation is the opposite.
You're actually
not going anywhere.
You are the vortex that's
calling the experience to you.
So then when you combine
that clear intention
with an elevated
emotion, when there's
a vibrational match
between your energy
and that potential
in the quantum field,
it's like taking a tuning fork
and hitting the tuning fork,
and you another
one, and that one
is going to produce
the same harmonic.
Now there's a vibrational match.
And the longer you can
sustain that energy,
or better yet, the faster
the frequency, the more
elevated the emotion, the
faster in time it happens.
And you teach people how to do
that properly, they would never
try to control the outcome.
They trust in the outcome
because this is the center
where you trust the unknown.
So now you're laying
down the very thing
that you've done because
you don't feel separate
from possibility.
You're not a materialist
defining reality
with your senses,
which occurs primarily
from the hormones of stress.
Actually, the
opposite is happening.
Your heart is open and you feel
connected to something greater.
And it's none of your business
when it's going to happen
or how it's going to
happen, because if you
can predict when
it's going to happen
and how it's going to
happen, it's not an unknown.
>>LISA: Back to matter.
And the chemicals
that release when
you're in that state
of that coherence
are the growth hormones,
the serotonin, the--
>>DISPENZA: Well, there's
1,300 different chemicals
that are released that stimulate
your immune system, that
cause regeneration and
repair in the body.
And those 1,300 chemicals
are profound chemicals
that actually lengthen
telomeres as well.
>>LISA: Better than
any antidepressant.
>>DISPENZA: And that's the
greatest pharmacy in the world.
So now it turns out that 10
minutes of gratitude a day
releases a chemical
called immunoglobulin
A, the primary defense
against bacteria and viruses.
10 minutes of anger or
impatience or frustration
or fear turns on 1,200
different chemicals
that causes the body
to mobilize energy
and suppresses
the immune system.
So then--
>>LISA: In 10 minutes.
>>DISPENZA: In 10 minutes.
So then the person who is
feeling gratitude and those
elevated emotions
in the morning,
and you check their blood
values of IgA, immunoglobulin A,
at the end of the day,
it's still elevated.
In other words, it lasts.
You just took the shot,
you took the flu shot,
and it's going to protect you
against bacteria and viruses.
Now here's the truth.
Germs don't make you sick.
We make ourselves sick.
And if you're in a company where
everybody's getting infected
and they're all sick at the
same time, it's not the bug.
It's they're all stressed,
and they're all susceptible.
They're called
opportunistic bacteria
because they're waiting
for an opportunity
to proliferate if your
immune system is compromised.
People need to know
the truth about this
because they're
programmed into believing
that germs make them sick.
So there's no germ out
there with your name on it
that's waiting to attack you.
We have just as many
microorganisms in our body
as we have cells.
So it's just the way in which
we manage our internal states.
>>LISA: And it's
not the cold weather
or the change of climate or
anything that makes you sick.
It's your immune
system being suppressed
by your emotional state that
opens up the door for it.
>>DISPENZA: Ah,
you're getting it.
>>LISA: I'm a student.
Well, I love this video
because it's another great way
to learn, where Dr. Joe's
talking about our three brains.
Take a look at this.
>>DISPENZA: Now we
have three brains
that allow us to go from
thinking to doing to being.
Each brain is its own
individual biocomputer
with its own anatomy and own
circuitry, its own physiology
and chemistry.
They even have their own history
as well as their own sense
of time and space.
Now the first brain,
the neocortex,
it's the newest
brain in evolution.
It's that
walnut-shaped structure
that sits on the outside
with all of its folds
and valleys in yellow there.
It's the newest, the most
evolved and highly specialized
in human beings.
Right under the neocortex
is called the limbic brain,
the chemical brain,
the emotional brain,
or the mammalian brain.
It's about the size
of a lemon, and it's
responsible for regulating
internal chemical order.
Right in the back of the
brain stem there in red
is called the cerebellum,
the reptilian brain.
It's the oldest
brain in evolution.
It's the seat of the
subconscious mind.
Now your brain is made up of
about 100 billion neurons.
If you took 100
billion sheets of paper
and stacked them on
top of each other,
it would be 5,000 miles high.
That's the distance from
Los Angeles to London.
Now nerve cells possess
the unique ability
to store and communicate
information between each other.
So your neocortex,
your thinking brain,
is the seat of your
conscious awareness.
You're listening to me right
now with your neocortex.
And what the neocortex loves
to do is to gather information.
And every time you
learn something new,
you make a new
synaptic connection
in your thinking brain.
That's what learning is.
Learning is forging
new connections.
And every time you
learn something new
your brain physically changes.
So you read a book on
how to ride a bicycle.
You read a book on how
to build a dog house.
to dance the salsa,
how to cook French cuisine,
how to become successful,
how to be a better parent.
And your brain literally
upscales its hardware
to reflect a new level of mind.
The principle in neuroscience
says this-- nerve cells
that fire together
wire together.
And as you begin to
learn new information,
you biologically
wire that information
into your cerebral architecture.
So if learning is making
new synaptic connections,
then remembering is
maintaining and sustaining
those connections.
And just like any relationship,
the more you communicate,
the more bonded you become.
And neurons are
exactly the same way.
Now once these neurons begin
to fire and wire together,
they actually form networks,
what neuroscientists
call neural networks.
Now neural networks
are just gangs
of neurons that have
fired and wired together
to form a community of
neurosynaptic connections.
It could be related to an
idea, a concept, a memory,
experience, a skill or
behavior, or an action.
But these networks actually have
an electrochemical component.
And if you want to see
mind in action, watch this.
That's a thought, right there.
Again.
So you generate more
electrical impulses
in your brain in one day
than all the cell phones
on the planet put together.
Now the neuroscientific
definition of mind
is mind is the brain in action.
Mind is the brain at work.
Mind is what the brain does.
And because we have 100 billion
neurons seamlessly pieced
together, we can
make the brain fire
in different sequences,
different patterns,
and different combinations.
And whenever we make the
brain work differently,
we're changing our mind.
>>LISA: OK.
So we have these three
brains, and they're constantly
working together.
>>DISPENZA: So let's
make it really simple.
You learn a bit of information.
That information actually
causes neurons to assemble
and to connect new connections.
That's what learning is.
We said that.
And it's stored
in your thinking,
theoretical, philosophical,
analytical neocortex.
If you take that information
and you get your body involved,
and you apply it
and you personalize
it or you demonstrate
it, it means
you have to modify your
behaviors in some way
and do something differently
and initiate that knowledge.
And if you do it properly,
you have a new experience.
The experience, then, enriches
the circuits in your brain
that you understood
philosophically.
But then another
part of the brain
called the chemical brain
or the emotional brain
or the limbic brain
makes a chemical for you
to feel differently.
So the moment you feel
compassion, or the moment
you feel like a patient
parent, or the moment
you feel like a great
leader because you read
the book on any one
of those things,
the moment you
feel that emotion,
you're teaching
your body chemically
to understand what your mind
has intellectually understood.
So we can say knowledge is
for the mind and experience is
for the body.
And in that moment you
are embodying knowledge.
The word is becoming
flesh, and you're
signaling new genes in new ways
because it's a new experience.
And the chemical reaction
from the environment
is selecting new.
Genes
If you're able to reproduce that
experience over and over again,
the process of
re-experiencing it
is neurologically and
chemically conditioning
your brain and body to
work together as one mind.
Or if you've done
something so many times
your body knows how to do
it as well as your mind,
now you're in a state of being.
Now it's innate in you.
It's who you are.
You've done it so many times you
don't have to think about it.
It's almost subconscious.
So our job, then, is
the go from philosopher
to initiate to master, from
thinking to doing to being.
The mind, the body, the
soul, from knowledge
to experience to wisdom.
And we have all the biological
and neurological machinery
to do that.
So the problem, I think,
that we have in our life
is we reach a
certain point where
we stop evolving into
that state of being,
and we get caught up in
self-conscious beliefs
and perceptions about
the way we think
reality is based
on how we've had so
many experiences in our life.
>>LISA: Sameness.
The sameness.
>>DISPENZA: So
then people make up
things about reality because
of their past experiences.
And all beliefs are
subconscious states of being.
And the beliefs we have
about things actually
could work for us or against
us depending on how we're
subconsciously programmed.
You're subconsciously
programmed to think
that sugar is bad for you.
I mean, they've done experiments
where they take people
and they measure
their immune response,
and they tell them
chocolate is good for them
chocolate is bad for them.
People who think that
chocolate's bad for them,
their immune system is
way more compromised
than the person who's eating
chocolate and enjoying it
and eventually
your immune system
stimulated so I mean diet
is a lot like religion.
You've got to be careful
when you talk about it.
>>LISA: Well, not so much.
I mean, you can really
truly change your mind
about what you're eating, and
your body will fall in line.
>>DISPENZA: Well, I
mean, if you think
about the preacher in the deep
south of the United States
who moves into a state of
religious ecstasy and drinks
strychnine and has no
biological effects,
he's certainly in a
different state of being.
>>LISA: True.
That's the extreme.
>>DISPENZA: He's
not saying, oh geez,
I wonder if I'm going
to get poisoned today.
He's changed his
internal state, and it's
causing his body to be
immune to the conditions
in his environment.
>>LISA: That's how
powerful our minds are,
and that's what your
work talks about,
and that's what I
love so much, is
the power of our mind
to change our bodies,
and that body's ability to
change our mind as well.
>>DISPENZA: And it may take
more than one shot at it.
We have some people
in our work that
have healed themselves of
very serious health conditions
that have taken four years
or three years to do it,
because it took them five years
to create the condition because
of a stressed-out
lifestyle and poor choices.
And they understand
that in order
to turn the battleship
around-- even placebo studies.
Placebo studies sometimes
are six or eight weeks long.
The depression
studies, the person's
taking a placebo
for six or eight
weeks to remind themselves
of the new state of being.
So you don't need the sugar
pill or the saline injection
to move into a new
state of being.
You can combine
a clear intention
with an elevated emotion and
change your very physiology.
But, you're knocking
on the genetic door
and it may take a
little bit of time
to continuously
knock on that door
before you program the gene.
Other people are able to do it
in a very short amount of time.
So the key is that we just
have to be persistent with it,
and we start to
see some changes.
>>LISA: And you can set
that time of that gratitude
or whatever the practices
as if it is a pill, a mind
pill, where you've got a
time capsule where you really
are concentrating and
feeling and experiencing
that emotion in order to change
the chemistry in the brain.
>>DISPENZA: Once you understand
the science of how it's done,
and you understand
the what and the why,
the how becomes easier.
>>LISA: Yes, absolutely.
That's what you're so
responsible for doing
for so many people.
Thank you so much, Dr. Joe.
I so appreciate you
being here, as always.
And if you'd like to watch
a replay of my interview
with Dr. Joe Dispenza,
you can go to gaia.com.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay inspired.
[THEME MUSIC]